New guide: Filtering and sorting with chronological values (#1917)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/advanced/chronological_filtering_sorting.md

# Filtering and sorting with chronological values

In this guide, you will learn about Meilisearch's approach to date and time values, how to prepare your dataset for indexing, and how to chronologically sort and filter search results.

> ## Preparing your documents

Author: I present the ideal case (dataset contains timestamps) first, then the likely scenario of a dataset using datetime.

Alternatively, we could separate these two cases in two sections, or even make the datetime scenario a subsection of `## Preparing your documents`. 

Any opinions?

Reviewer: I don't get this 👀

> To filter and sort search results based on chronological values, your documents must have a numeric field containing a UNIX timestamp. In this videogames dataset, the release year is formatted as a timestamp:

Reviewer: Pretty sure everyone reading would probably know what UNIX timestamps are, but maybe add a link for it? We do that for the ISO 8601 and RFC 3339 formats too.

```json
[
  {
    "id": 0,
    "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
    "genre": "adventure",
    "release_date": 1514761200
  },
  {
    "id": 1,
    "title": "The Excavation of Hob's Barrow",
    "genre": "adventure",
    "release_date": 1640991600
  },
  {
    "id": 2,
    "title": "Bayonetta 2",
    "genre": "action",
    "release_date": 1388530800
  }
]
```

If your chronological data is expressed in datetime formats such as ISO 8601 like `"2022-01-01"`, you must convert it to a numeric value before indexing it with Meilisearch.

Most programming languages have built-in tools to help you with this process:

```js
let game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "year": 2018
};

const timestamp = Date.parse(game.year);

game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "year": 2018,
  "release_date": timestamp
};

> ```

Author: Is this a necessary? I want to show the conversion process, but completely isolated from an actual  script for data parsing/formatting.

:::tip
When preparing your dataset, it can be useful to leave the date and time fields in your documents intact. In the example above, we keep the `year` field because it is more readable than the raw `timestamp`.
:::

> After adding a numeric timestamp to all documents, index your dataset as usual.

Author: Am I silly or does this sentence feel a bit lost and alone here?

> ## Chronological filtering

Author: I have chosen to use "Chronological" throughout the article to avoid entering the pitfall of date (YYYY-MM-DD) vs time (18:27).

Is "chronological" too complex a word?

Reviewer: You can ignore this if you want
Doesn't chronological mean arranging in the order it happened? Chronological sorting makes sense to me; you're sorting by oldest to newest or the other way round, but not chronological filtering. I didn't find any search results for `chronological filtering`. Should we go with something like Filtering or sorting by date? It will also get rid of any complexity "chronological" brings

Reviewer: Doesn't filtering by date, generally, mean you can filter by time too? At least, that's how I see it

# Filtering and sorting by date

In this guide, you will learn about Meilisearch's approach to date and time values, how to prepare your dataset for indexing, and how to chronologically sort and filter search results.

## Preparing your documents

> To filter and sort search results based on chronological values, your documents must have a numeric field containing a [UNIX timestamp](https://kb.narrative.io/what-is-unix-time). In this videogames dataset, the release year is formatted as a timestamp:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To filter and sort search results chronologically, your documents must have at least one numeric field containing a [UNIX timestamp](https://kb.narrative.io/what-is-unix-time).

As an example, consider a database of video games. In this dataset, the release year is formatted as a timestamp:
```

```json
[
  {
    "id": 0,
    "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
    "genre": "adventure",
    "release_date": 1514761200
  },
  {
    "id": 1,
    "title": "The Excavation of Hob's Barrow",
    "genre": "adventure",
    "release_date": 1640991600
  },
  {
    "id": 2,
    "title": "Bayonetta 2",
    "genre": "action",
    "release_date": 1388530800
  }

> ]

Reviewer 2: After sticking these dates into a unix timestamp converter, I was a bit confused that they didn't match up with the actual release dates of the games in question. Then I realized that they are supposed to be the release year, not the release date. I think it would make more sense for this guide to use specific dates as examples, since filtering or sorting by year is easy even without using a timestamp.

```

If your chronological data is expressed in another format, like [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html), you must convert it to a numeric value before indexing it with Meilisearch.

Most programming languages have built-in tools to help you with this process. The example below converts a game's release year, `2018`, to a numeric timestamp using JavaScript:

```js
let game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "year": 2018
};

const timestamp = Date.parse(game.year);

game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "year": 2018,
  "release_date": timestamp
};
```

:::tip
When preparing your dataset, it can be useful to leave the original date and time fields in your documents intact. In the example above, we keep the `year` field because it is more readable than the raw `timestamp`.
:::

> After adding a numeric timestamp to all documents, index your data as usual:
> 
> ```sh
> curl \
>   -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/documents' \
>   -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>   --data-binary @games.json
> ```

Reviewer 2: This example is not related to the specific aims of this guide, and will not run for the user since there is no games.json file. My initial reaction was that it should be removed. However, I see how it can be helpful for "continuity", so to speak, since later commands are using the `games` index. So if we keep it, it needs to be clear that it is an example.

````suggestion
After adding a numeric timestamp to all documents, [index your data](/reference/api/documents.md#add-or-replace-documents) as usual. See below for an example using our nonexistent video games dataset.

```sh
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/documents' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary @games.json
```
````

## Filtering by timestamp

To filter search results based on their timestamp, add your document's timestamp field to the list of [`filterableAttributes`](/reference/api/settings.md#update-filterable-attributes):

```sh
curl \
  -X PUT 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/settings/filterable-attributes' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '[
    "release_date"
  ]'
```

Once you have configured `filterableAttributes`, you can filter search results by date. The following query only returns games released between 2018 and 2022:

```sh
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "q": "",
    "filter": "release_date >= 1514761200 AND release_date < 1672527600"
  }'
```

## Sorting by timestamp

> To sort search results chronologically, add your document's timestamp field to the `sortableAttributes` index setting:

Reviewer 2: I prefer the wording you used above. I think it sounds a bit strange to talk about **adding** a field **to an index setting**, whereas **adding an element to a list** is very intuitive.

We should also provide a link for sortable attributes, as we did for filterable attributes above.

```suggestion
To sort search results chronologically, add your document's timestamp field to the list of [`sortableAttributes`](/reference/api/settings.md#update-sortable-attributes):
```

```sh
curl \
  -X PUT 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/settings/sortable-attributes' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '[
    "release_date"
  ]'
```

> Once you have configured `sortableAttributes`, you can sort your search results based on their timestamp. The following query returns all `adventure` games sorted from most recent to oldest:
> 
> ```sh
> curl \
>   -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/search' \
>   -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>   --data-binary '{
>     "q": "adventure",
>     "sort": ["release_date:desc"]
>   }'
> ```

Reviewer 2: I would suggest removing the adventure query and just return all games sorted from most recent to oldest. Simpler examples are better!

````suggestion
Once you have configured `sortableAttributes`, you can sort your search results based on their timestamp. The following query returns all games sorted from most recent to oldest:

```sh
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "q": "",
    "sort": ["release_date:desc"]
  }'
```
````
